
The Project Gutenberg eBook of A brief and remarkable narrative of the
life and extreme sufferings of Barnabas Downs, Jun

This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and 
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions 
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms 
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online 
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States, 
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located 
before using this eBook.


Title: A brief and remarkable narrative of the life and extreme
sufferings of Barnabas Downs, Jun

Author: Barnabas Downs

Release Date: September 29, 2023 [eBook #71758]

Language: English

Credits: Steve Mattern, David Wilson and the Online Distributed
         Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net

*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A BRIEF AND REMARKABLE
NARRATIVE OF THE LIFE AND EXTREME SUFFERINGS OF BARNABAS DOWNS, JUN ***





[Illustration: Woodcut of a shipwreck]




                        A brief and remarkable
                               NARRATIVE
                                OF THE
                                 LIFE
                      And extreme =Sufferings= of
                        _BARNABAS DOWNS, Jun._

  Who was among the Number of thoſe who eſcaped Death on board the
    Privateer Brig =Arnold=, =James Magee=, Commander, which was caſt
    away near =Plymouth-Harbour=, in a moſt terrible Snow-Storm,
    December 26, 1778, when more than Sixty Perſons were frozen to
    Death.——Containing alſo

  A particular =Account= of ſaid Shipwreck.

            Printed by =E. Russell=, for the =Author=, 1786




=Printing-Office Liberty-square=, Sept. 22, 1786.

In the Preſs, and in a few Days will be publiſhed and ready for Sale,
by =E. Russell=, at his Office, near Liberty Pole, by the Thouſand,
Hundred, Groce or leſſer Quantity, at the moſt reaſonable Rate:—Alſo
may be had of Mr. =Benjamin Guild=, at the Boſton Book-Store, near
the State-Houſe in Cornhill; Col. =Ebenezer Battelle=, Bookſeller,
at the London Book-Store, in Marlboro’-Street; Mr. =William Green=,
Bookſeller, at Shakeſpear’s-Head, in Newbury-Street; Capt. =William
Green=, at his Grocery and Weſt-India Store near the Bridge, in
_Boſton_; Mr. =Lemuel Cox=, and Mr. =Trumbull=, Innholder, near the
Bridge, and Mr. =Edward Hayes=, in _Charleſton_; Mr. =Edward Killins=,
at his Store, near the Market, in _Salem_; Mr. =Bulkly Emerson=, at the
Poſt-Office, in _Newbury-Port_; Mr. =Alford Butler=, Bookſeller, in
_Portſmouth, New-Hampſhire_, and by many other Printers, Bookſellers,
Shopkeepers and Travelling-Traders in Town and Country.


                             BICKERSTAFF’s
                          GENUINE AND CORRECT
                           BOSTON ALMANACK,
                For the Year of our =Redemption=, 1787.

Which will contain a great Variety of uſeful and entertaining =Matter=,
in =Prose= and =Verse=.

This =Work= will be likewiſe ornamented with a large Number of engraved
Plates, ſome of which repreſent the twelve Signs of the Zodiack in
Miniature, and the ſeveral Employments and Diverſions of the =Gentlemen
Farmers=, throughout the different Seaſons of the Year:—Alſo a curious
Repreſentation of a =County Convention=, debating on State-Affairs; at
the Head of the Table is a Figure of _HONESTUS_, that renowned Champion
and bold Atteſtor of the =Liberty= of the Subject, and ſworn Enemy
to =Lawyers=, who is converſing with one of the Order; over his Head
is a Label with theſe Words “_No_ =Courts=, _no_ LAWYERS:” Another
Plate repreſents a very curious and droll Scene of a large Group of
the =Black Order=, or the =Sons= of =Littleton= and =Coke=, mounted
on Jack-Aſſes, Peacocks, &c. returning from a rich Feaſt at =Concord
Court=, &c.




PREFACE.

  _To the READER, into whoſe Hands this_ =Narrative= _may fall;
    eſpecially my Seafaring_ =Brethren=.

  _FRIENDS_,

When any remarkable circumſtances take place in a man’s life, he feels
commonly a diſpoſition to communicate them to the world: If they have
been deliverances from great and ſignal dangers, he will make this
communication from a principle of gratitude to the =Being= who hath
protected and preſerved him: He will wiſh to engage others to be
thankful on his behalf; and a knowledge of the kindneſs of Heaven to
him may lead others to truſt in GOD, when they are brought into like
diſtreſs and danger. By theſe motives the Subject of the following
pages hopes he is influenced in publiſhing them to the world; which is
all the apology that may be expected from the =Publick=’s diſtreſſed
Friend,

  _BARN. DOWNES_, Jun.
  =Barnstable=, September 10, 1786.

  ==> _The Author gratefully acknowledges himſelf indebted to a_
    Reverend =Gentleman= _in_ Boſton _for his kindneſs in correcting
    the following ſheets_.




A NARRATIVE, &c.


I was born in _Barnſtable_, in _New-England_, October 2, 1757, of
credible Parents, whom I ſerved as an obedient Son, I hope, until the
commencement of the late war called me from my home, and led me to
exchange the occupation of a Huſbandman, to which I was bred for the
more dangerous employment of a Soldier. In this capacity I served my
Country 3 campaigns, and know not that my behaviour was censured by my
officers.


After having returned for a time to the Farming-Buſineſs, I concluded
to try my fortune at ſea: I entered accordingly on board the ſchooner
_Bunker-Hill_, Captain _Iſaac Cobb_, Commander, on a privateering
voyage: But we had not been out more than 6 days before we were taken
by the brig _Hope_, one _Brown_, Commander, and carried into _Halifax_.
We were committed to jail and kept very ſhort: Then I was taken with
the ſmall-pox, thro’ which GOD ſafely carried me when deſtitute of
the neceſſaries of life, and under great preſſure of mind. But after
my being recovered ſo far as to be returned to the jail from the
hoſpital, in conſequence of my having nothing but a ſmall allowance of
ſalt proviſions, which were next to poiſon for a ſick perſon, I was
taken with a violent fever, which returned me again to the hoſpital,
and brought me to the gates of the grave. No perſon who hath not
experienced it can imagine how gloomy and diſtreſſing it is to be under
ſuch circumſtances: To be far diſtant from our deareſt Friends; to be
among perſons who are not only without any concern for us, or intereſt
in our fate, but who are our profeſſed enemies, and not governed even
by the common principles of humanity, is a caſe truly melancholy. In
this ſituation I was attacked with a bleeding of the noſe, (to which
I had before been ſubject) which brought me to the very borders of
eternity!


After this I was, by the ſmiles of heaven recovered and reſtored, by
a cartel, with 400 of my Countrymen to our own homes. How welcome
they were to us, and how pleaſant it was to me to ſee the faces of my
Friends again, any one may imagine more eaſily than I can deſcribe!

But tho’ I had been ſo unſucceſſful in my firſt attempt at ſea, I could
not reſiſt the inclination I had to try once more what Providence would
do for me: I left my native place, went to _Boſton_, and entered on
board the brig _Arnold_, _James Magee_, Commander. I well remember I
felt an unusual dejection when I entered on this undertaking; and tho’
I pretend not to ſay that this foreboded the miſfortunes I was to meet
with in this fatal veſſel, yet I have often reflected upon it ſince
with a degree of admiration.

While the brig lay in the harbour, I attempted with ſome other
hands to go on board another veſſel in a ſmall boat, but the wind
ſuddenly riſing we were in danger of being drowned; the boat run on
_Governor’s-Iſland_, and we were obliged to ſtay there 24 hours before
we could get off. Providence preſerved my life in this danger, in order
that I might live thro’ greater, and teſtify to his loving kindneſs and
mercy.

On December 24, 1778, Capt. _Magee_ ſailed from _Boſton_: We had been
at ſea but a few hours, when a moſt terrible gale of wind aroſe,
ſo that the water was almoſt knee deep on the leeward ſide of the
quarter-deck. We continued in the Bay that day and the night following,
but on the next day we got into _Plymouth_. The wind was abated, but
the cold was ſevere and intenſe beyond deſcription. We came to anchor a
little below _Beach-Point_, in the Harbour of _Plymouth_.


On Saturday, December 26, about 6 o’clock in the morning, from the
violent motion of the ſea, the brig ſtruck the bottom as tho’ it would
drive her keel in. As there was not depth of water enough to work the
veſſel in the place where we lay, and we ſaw a heavy ſtorm coming on,
our Commander thought it beſt to cut our cables and let her drive,
which was immediately done. The ſtorm increaſed very faſt, ſo that we
were obliged to cut away the main-maſt, and we drifted upon an hard
flat a little to the weſtward of _Beach-Point_.

This was early on Saturday morning, and we now laboured hard in
throwing over our wood and getting our guns off the decks into the
hold, but the veſſel began to leak very faſt, and with every motion of
the ſea ſhe ſtruck the bottom as tho’ ſhe would ſplit in pieces. We
kept 2 pumps going, but could not gain upon the water. The ſtorm now
increaſed to a moſt prodigious degree: It ſnowed ſo thick that we could
ſee but a very little way from the brig, and the cold was extreme;
we continued hard at work all day without eating or drinking any
thing ſcarcely, having but little appetite with the proſpect of death
continually before our eyes.

Until now we had hopes of eſcape, but juſt before night we looked into
the hold and ſaw the caſks floating about; this drove us to deſpair,
and we forſook the pumps without a ray of hope but from the immediate
interpoſition of divine Providence. Many of the people now began to
pray, and I went into the cabbin and ſat upon one of the gun-carriages.
I had not been there long before I ſaw cheſts floating about, and
perceived that the tide was flowing on us very faſt; by direction of
the Capt. all left the cabbin and came upon the quarter-deck.

It is not poſſible to deſcribe my ſenſations at this period; death
appeared inevitable, and we waited every moment for its approach! Even
now, when I recollect my feelings it is difficult to ſteady my pen! And
indeed I had ground enough for my apprehenſions, for we had not been
long upon the quarter-deck before the water upon the main-deck was even
with it. Our fore-maſt was ſtill ſtanding, which cauſed the veſſel to
roll very much, but when we had cut that away ſhe lay ſtiller. The brig
now lay ſunk; the tide was flowing faſt and the ſea broke very heavily
over us. We were all upon the quarter-deck, and the water came in upon
us ancle deep.

There was a ſail in the netting upon the windward-quarter, which we
contrived to laſh over us, but there were ſo many under it that we
ſhould have been ſtifled for want of breath, if we had not cut places
to let in the air. The tide was then about at its height but the ſtorm
did not abate. There was nothing to be heard around but ſcreeches,
groans and deep lamentations for themſelves and their families, and
earneſt cries to GOD for mercy and relief!

There was ſuch a croud upon the quarter deck we could not ſtand up
without treading upon one another. Being in a ſtruggle I was thrown
down and trampled upon as if the breath would be crouded out of my
body: However I ſoon recovered my feet and trampled upon others in my
turn; for the immediate regard which every man had to his own life
prevented him from attending to the diſtreſſes of his neighbours!

Struggling in this manner and trying to clear ourſelves from thoſe who
fell down had pulled off moſt of our ſhoes, and the wet and cold ſoon
froze our feet. Nature could ſuſtain it no longer and the people began
to die all around me. Capt. _John Ruſſell_ of _Barnſtable_ was the
firſt of thoſe with whom I was acquainted that died, but many others
ſoon followed him. Fatigue and diſtreſs, added to the extreme cold and
deſpair of relief, put a period to the lives of great numbers. Thoſe
who were able to ſtand were obliged to huddle up cloſe together, and
breathe in each other’s faces to preſerve them from freezing to death,
while their comrades were dying around them all night. In the morning
a moſt awful ſight preſented itſelf to us; 60 of our Comrades lay dead
acroſs each other, and but 2 of my Townſmen were among the living!

On Lord’s-Day, Dec. 27, the ſtorm abated and the ſun appeared clear,
but the ſevere cold ſtill continued. We ſaw _Plymouth_ and a number
of people coming along the ſhore for our relief: We could diſcern
them puſh off two boats and make an hard trial to come to us, but
the harbour was ſo full of ice they could not reach us: We ſaw them
return and it gave us an inexpreſſible ſhock. The elevation which their
appearance gave us tended to ſink us the lower. Our ſituation was very
gloomy; we had little to ſupport nature except rum; no ſhoes on our
feet, and very much frozen; the Heavens was our only covering!

I retained my ſenſes until about 2 o’clock on Lord’s-Day, but was then
deprived of them and lay on the quarter-deck until the next day, when a
boat got to us in order to carry the living aſhore, which amounted only
to 32. When they were looking around to collect the ſurvivors, they at
firſt ſuppoſed me to be dead, but ſeeing one of my eye-lids move they
took me up and laying me in the boat carried me aſhore.

I was carried to Mr. _Bartlet_’s tavern, whoſe kindneſs to me I would
thus publickly acknowledge, and hope I ſhall always remember with
gratitude. My cloaths were firſt cut from off me and I was put into
cold water in order to take out the froſt: I was then placed in bed and
having my teeth forced open had ſome cordials poured down my throat,
but I have no remembrance of any of theſe tranſactions, for I lay
perfectly ſenſeleſs until 2 o’clock on Monday, when my ſenſes came to
me at once. My eyes were not open, but I heard the voices of perſons
talking around me, and the firſt idea which ſtruck me was, that I was
ſtill on board the brig, but that a boat come to our relief. I ſoon
however opened my eyes and was informed of what had happened and where
I then was.

I recovered gradually, but was obliged to paſs thro’ the painful
operation of having ſome of my limbs ſeperated from my body: But after
all theſe diſtreſſes I am ſtill among the living to praiſe GOD! Let my
ſpared life be devoted to his ſervice, and may I ever be mindful of his
benefits!


_Names of the Deceas’d belonging to_ Barnſtable.

Capt. _John Ruſſell_, _Barn. Lothrop_, _Daniel Hall_, _Tho. Caſley_,
_Eben. Bacon_, _Jaſey Garritt_, _John Berry_, _Barnabas Howes_,
_Stephen Bacon_, _Jon. Lothrop, Boſton_, a Negro Man.




_The SHIPWRECK: A_ =Hymn= _of Praiſe_.

  _Deep calleth unto deep at the noiſe of thy water-ſpouts: All
    thy waves and thy billows are gone over me.—Yet the LORD hath
    ſhewn his loving kindneſs in the day-time: In the night my song
    shall be with him, and my prayer unto the GOD of my life.—When I
    remember theſe things I pour out my ſoul in me, with the voice of
    joy and praiſe._ David.


  When mountain billows o’er me roll
  I poured out my troubled ſoul
  When waves of adverſe fortune meet,
  Thou prov’d a guide unto my feet.

    2. My ſong ſhall always be on GOD,
  I’m ſav’d by his uplifted rod;
  My utmoſt ſearch ſhall be to know
  The LORD who ſav’d from froſt and ſnow.

    3. LORD may I fear thee all my days,
  Thy mercies claim my higheſt praiſe;
  For in the time of deep deſpair,
  Preſerv’d I was by heav’nly care.

    4. The LORD is good to thoſe who call
  On Him, and do depend for all;
  In adverſe fate if we depend
  On GOD, he will deliv’rence ſend.

    5. In deep diſtreſs and trouble ſore,
  When ſurging billows round me roar,
  Altho’ he ſlay me, yet I’ll truſt
  On =God=, my Saviour, who is juſt.

    6. Not only truſt but I will call
  On =Him=, who is the LORD of all;
  My day-ſong ſhall in thee accord,
  And in the night I’ll praiſe the LORD.

    7. Thy goodneſs and thy tender care
  Reliev’d me when in deep deſpair;
  Thy gracious and thy friendly Crook
  I will record in this my Book.

    8. Had it not been for thy controul,
  The deep would ſwallow up my ſoul;
  Tho’ froſt me of my feet deprive,
  Yet I will praiſe thee I’m alive.

    9. Alive to praiſe thee, O my GOD,
  Tho’ chaſt’ned with afflicting rod;
  But ſhould my ſins been marked well,
  My ſoul would have been ſent to Hell.

    10. But bleſſed be his holy Hand,
  I am return’d to native land;
  Tho’ ſickneſs did my ſpirits waſte,
  Thy flowing mercy I do taſte.

    11. My Kindred and my Friends ſo dear;
  Truſt in the LORD and always fear
  =Him= who can ſave, if you rely
  On =One= who rules above the ſky.

    12. Lo, =Seamen=, one and all attend,
  Look well to what I here have pen’d;
  Let me intreat you not to ſwear,
  But live in GOD’s moſt holy fear.

    13. He will vouchſafe when danger’s nigh,
  To help, if on =Him= you rely;
  Tho’ ſtorms ariſe on raging main,
  He’ll bring thee ſafe to Friends again.

    14. I ſay to all truſt in the LORD,
  He will your grottos always guard,
  From tempeſts dire and ſickneſs ſore;
  Your baſket fill, and bleſs your ſtore.




_A HYMN. By another_ =Author=.


  My ſoul, my powers bleſs ye the =Lord=,
    With Hymns of praiſe his wonders ſound,
  When threat’ning danger round me ſtood
    I ſought his help and ſuccour found.

  2. Hopeleſs I saw my gloomy caſe,
    When burſting waves broke o’er my head,
  Then did my ſoul addreſs his throne,
    And all its wants before him ſpread.

  3. Then in the mount did GOD appear,
    And made his light in darkneſs ſhine,
  At his rebuke the Tempeſt fled,
    To magnify his arm divine.

  4. He ſaid I have a ranſom found,
    Therefore ye ſons of men return,
  I will no more with you contend,
    Nor let my wrath forever burn.

  5. I am the LORD who rules the ſeas,
    My voice can huſh the roaring waves,
  The keys of death are in my Hand
    To ſhut or open oozy graves.

  6. Come truſt the LORD in all your ſtraits,
    His great ſalvation call to mind,
  My own experience can atteſt,
    The LORD is good, his dealings kind.

  7. Within the book of his accounts,
    Each of my members written are,
  Without commiſſion from his Hand,
    There ſhall not fall a limb or hair.

  8. With joyful heart I’ll tread his Courts,
    And pay my vows among his Saints,
  To Him my life, my all devote,
    Who bow’d his Ear to my complaints.




Transcriber’s Note


=This= denotes the semantic use of small caps in the original text.

Archaic and inconsistent spelling retained, along with inconsistent
hyphenation (quarter-deck/quarter deck).

To revert to modern letterforms, globally replace "ſ" with "s".


*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A BRIEF AND REMARKABLE NARRATIVE
OF THE LIFE AND EXTREME SUFFERINGS OF BARNABAS DOWNS, JUN ***



Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.


Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE
THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK


To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.


Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works


1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.


1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.


1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.



1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.


1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:


1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:


  
    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  


1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.


1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.


1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.


1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.


1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.


1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.


1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:


    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    


1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.


1.F.


1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.


1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.


1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.


1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.


1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.


1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.


Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™


Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.


Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.


Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation


The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.


The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact


Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation


Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.


The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.


While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.


International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.


Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.


Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works


Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.


Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.


This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

